An amendment to this Charter is Appropriate if intent to perform it was
announced between 4 and 14 days ago, and no members have publicly
objected to it since.

Any player may join this Organization by flipping eir Budget switch for
this Organization to a positive value, by announcement. Any member of
this Organization may leave this Organization by flipping eir Budget
switch for this Organization to zero, by announcement.

A member of this organization may offer a number of votes for sale by
paying this organization the current Pending List Price (the "bond"),
and naming a price, in Shinies, by announcement. A player who has
offered to sell their votes may retract eir offer by announcement. Any
member of this organization can buy the offered votes, if no other
player has done so, by paying this organization the price set by the
seller, by announcement.

A member of this organization may offer to buy a number votes by naming
the price, in Shinies, that e is willing to pay, by announcement. A
player who has offered to buy votes may retract eir offer by
announcement. Any member of this organization can fill an offer to buy
votes, if no other player has done so, by paying this organization the
current Pending List Price (the "bond"), by announcement.

A player who has sold votes must follow the buyer's voting directions
for one Agoran Decision per vote sold. If that player does so, e may
cause this organization to pay em the price at which e sold votes, plus
eir bond, without objection. If that player votes other than as
directed on an Agoran Decision covered by the sale, the buyer may cause
this organization to pay em the price at which e bought the votes and
to pay the seller's bond to Agora, without objection.

Voting instructions may be provided privately.
