About this Document
===================

This document contains the charter for the Surface and Orbit Authority. That
organization doesn't exist, unless you believe it does, in which case it does.

This project started as a gag post on Reddit, written in the style of an
after-action report, describing an incident that occurred while playing Space
Engineers with a friend. If Space Engineers had any real-world equivalent, the
incident would have been a major industrial disaster and an extremely expensive
loss of a spacecraft. Because it's a video game, though, the incident was an
entertaining mishap, instead - but the contrast between the two gave me the
idea for writing it up in that style. I subsequently decided to carry the joke
to completion by describing the kind of organization that would have an
official interest in reports of that nature.

The charter borrows heavily from `Agora`_, as I've always found that that
organization (which definitely exists, unless you believe that it doesn't) has
a shockingly effective process for deliberating and conducting business over
the internet. SOA is modelled on thisÂ and reuses its core deliberative
mechanisms:

.. _Agora: https://agoranomic.org/

1. Actions via the publication of written documents;

2. Democratic voting on all key decisions, with protections against the tyrrany
   of simple majorities; and

3. A system of offices to handle the day-to-day administrivia of conducting
   business.

It also borrows heavily from Agora's authorial tone and tradition of legalism.
Agora, in turn, is rooted in `Nomic`_, a game described by Peter Suber in his
thesis, *The Paradox of Self-Amendment*, in 1982.

.. _Nomic: http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/writing/nomic.htm

If someone were to bootstrap the necessary infrastructure and personal
commitments, this organization could, indeed, exist, and would operate as
described, as an unincorporated association.

However, in the process of adapting Agora's ruleset for this charter, I've
removed much of the verbiage that Agora has built up over time. This "scar tissue" serves two important purposes for Agora:

1. It prevents resolved disputes from being relitigated; and

2. It acts as a signal to new members that litigating the rules is an important
   activity.

Removing those clauses - and in many case removing whole subsystems - is a
deliberate choice. On the one hand, it opens the door to the few Agorans who
may show up to revisit old grievances, or to exercise loopholes Agora itself
has long since addressed. On the other hand, it mutes some of the cultural
signals saying that these disputes are what matters so that members can focus
on SOA's intended activities, instead of on rules disputes. Using naturalistic
language and simplified versions of Agora's systems is a deliberate attempt to
strike a balance between those two factors.

Reading the Charter
-------------------

The charter itself is organized into articles (one per `.rst` file), which are
in turn divided into rules. Each article, and each rule, are numbered for ease
of reference. The recommended reading order is in numerical order, as given in
the table of contents in ``index.rst``. Reading the articles in this order
introduces the organization itself and lays out the basic assumptions used
throughout the document, then describes membership in it and the conduct
expected of all members, before delving into organizational minutiae of
conducting business, disciplining members, and modifying the charter.

The charter document also contains a number of appendices, including the
section you're reading now. These appendices are not considered part of the
Charter. Instead, they provide insight into the history, intent, and
application of the Charter. There are no rules governing their presence or
controlling how the appendices may be amended, so, by rule 2.1 ("Regulated
Actions"), anyone who is capable of doing so can amend or extend these
appendices as they please, replace them with something else, or remove them
entirely.
