Risks
=====

No organization's rules are perfect, and no organization's rules can be
perfect. This charter is intended to provide an initial set of rules that allow
a group of like-minded people to operate together in good faith, to set
expectations between them, and to provide a predictable, unambiguous procedure
for conducting business.

The only protective clauses are the clauses allowing a member to be censured or
ejected for rule violation (by vote, which is a tradeoff), and the code of
conduct. Many risks exist that fall outside of the scope of this charter.

Privacy-Sensitive Infractions
-----------------------------

As highlighted on the Geek Feminism wiki and in the lived experiences of
numerous conference organizers, privacy can be an important factor in a
successful enforcement process. Privacy allows victims to make reports about
misconduct without fearing that reprisals for the act of reporting, and without
fearing that the information in the report will be further spread around.

The Charter only provides for infraction reports via explicitly-public
channels. There are ways to exercise this privately - finding a trustworthy
member of the organization and asking them to level a charge for you is one
option - but an organization based on this charter should develop a more
effective process for reporting and mediating abuse.

Stacking the Deck
-----------------

The charter contains no rules specifically addressing the risk of an organized
bloc joining with the express intention of changing the organization's policies
without the consent of existing members, pr preventing such a bloc from arising
from within the organization. You win no internet points for noticing and
exploiting this.

The system of power and the Adoption Majority voting system require that any
such bloc be quite large - multiple times larger than the organization's
membership outside of that bloc - but if a group is organized and motivated,
the option remains open.

This is something a real organization would generally want to mitigate. A few
options:

1. Require membership for a specific period before a member is able to cast a
   valid ballot.

2. Require that new members be referred by current members. (This effectively
   turns the organization into a private club.)

3. Adapt Agora's "Festival" system, which allows players to restrict voting to
   progressively more-established members for a limited period of time.

4. The creation of a more heavily-regulated organizational structure, in line
   with the classic "board of directors" model, to whom decision-making or veto
   power is delegated.

This pressure is not terribly acute when the organization's only valuable
things are its name and members, but this risk becomes more acute if the
organization is holds assets or has a meaningful external reputation.

Assets and Dues
---------------

The charter, as written, deliberately omits the question of dues. However, any
real organization of this nature would rapidly find itself in need of the
ability to raise funds and direct them. This *substantially* complicates the
organization's life:

1. As an unincorporated association, it would not be able to hold assets itself.
   Legal traditions around associations of this nature are complicated, but in
   many parts of the world, an association's assets are either nominally held
   in trust for the benefit of the members, or are subject to a mesh of mutual
   obligations between the members.

2. The charter, as written, allows minors to participate. Enforcing monetary
   obligations on minors, or allowing minors to direct the organization's
   spending, are both problematic for a whole range of reasons. If the
   organization comes to hold money or assets, it may be necessary to restrict
   membership to adults, to require that minor members have a guarantor, or to
   bar minors from decisions affecting those assets.

3. Money and its use is a common source of conflict. The charter is intended to
   provide a skeleton for resolving conflict through consensus decision-making,
   but the a rule requiring dues does need to consider issues like

  - What is the minimum form and amount of notice to the members of a change in
    dues that is morally defensible or legally supportable?

  - What are the reporting obligations of any persons, including officers,
    charged with collecting or disposing of assets?

  - Who is required to pay any income tax on dues collected, and who may claim
    any tax credits arising from disposing of dues?

  - Who bears the legal responsibility for disputes over dues - that is, who's
    willing to get sued or to carry liability insurance?

  - Should the association incorporate? If so, are its articles compatible with
    local rules about corporate structure and accountability, and what
    additional obligations will fall on the organization?

  Considering these questions was enough to convince me to punt on dues, even
  though one way an organization like this might have real utility be to
  collectively fund and operate a server to play on.

The charter is also silent on the question of intellectual property. This is a
carryover from Agora, as I do not have the expertise to adequately figure out
what licensing structure is appropriate for a charter that has been amended by
multiple people in the manner described. Its progenitor, Agora, has also rarely
grappled with this, even though Agora's players are otherwise delighted by
conundra like this, which gives me hope that the issue might remain irrelevant.
