Disciplinary Actions
====================

This article has a power of 2.

Infractions
-----------

An infraction is an act or omission which violates an article in this Charter.

Any person can level a charge by announcement. A charge consists of:

1. The name of a person (the accused);

2. A statement outlining the basis for the charge, such that the other members
   can determine whether they support the charge, which at minimum identifies
   the specific articles violated and identifies the acts or omissions which 
   violated the articles in question; and

3. A proposed remedy.

If a member other than the person levelling the charge announces their support
for this charge within fourteen days, then a provisional mark is placed against
the accused, and the Chair can and must immediately put the remedy to vote by
announcement.

Putting a remedy to vote is a decision. For this decision, the valid options
are the names of any remedies defined by this Charter, and the remedy proposed
in the charge, if any, and the voting method is First Past the Post.

When a decision to put a remedy to vote is resolved, the Chair must impose the
remedy on the accused, or, at the Chair's discretion, a lesser remedy, in the
message resolving the decision. For the purposes of this rule, all remedies
defined by this Charter are lesser remedies than any remedy proposed in the
charge. The Chair should only use this discretion to prevent remedies which are
unjustly harsh or which exceed the authority of this organization, and must
explain their reasoning in the message resolving the decision if they reduce
the remedy.

Discharge
---------

Discharge is a remedy.

When a charge is discharged, no penalty is imposed.

This remedy is appropriate when an infraction is accidental, minor in nature,
or where the accused has already taken full and appropriate steps to resolve it.

This remedy is a lesser remedy than a mark, ejection, or permanent ejection.

Standing & Marks
----------------

A mark is a remedy. A mark is valid if it was imposed, as allowed by other
articles under this Charter, within the past 30 days.

A provisional mark is a mark. A provisional mark is not valid if the decision
to put the remedy to a vote for the associated charge has been resolved. A
provisional mark cannot be imposed by putting a remedy to vote.

A member with at least one valid mark against them is not in good standing. All
other members are in good standing.

This remedy is appropriate when a minor infraction is intentional or is
repeated.

A mark is a lesser remedy than ejection or permanent ejection.

Ejection
--------

Ejection is a remedy.

A member who is ejected ceases to be a member, and cannot become a member for
90 days.

Ejection is appropriate for serious infractions which do not permanently injure
the reputation of SOA or endanger its members.

Ejection is a lesser remedy than permanent ejection.

Permanent Ejection
------------------

Permanent ejection is a remedy.

A member who is permanently ejected ceases to be a member, and cannot become a
member again.

Permanent ejection is appropriate for serious infractions which include the
risk of injury, illegal acts, sustained harassment, or which would bring the
organization into disrepute, or for wilful and chronic infractions.
