Modifications to this Charter
=============================

This article has a power of 4.

Amendments
----------

Where permitted by this Charter, an instrument can, as part of its effect,

1. Add an article to this Charter.

   The enacting instrument can, optionally, specify a title for the new article.

2. Repeal an article from this Charter.

   When an article is repealed, it ceases to be an article and its power is set
   to 0.

3. Amend the text of an article in this Charter.

4. Retitle an article in this Charter.

5. Change the power of an article with power no greater than the power of that
   instrument.

6. Change the order of a range of articles, provided that none of the articles
   in that range have a power greater than the power of that instrument.

An amendment is any effect that falls into the above classes. Article changes
always occur sequentially, never simultaneously.

An amendment can take effect only if its full text was published to the
members, along with an unambiguous and clear specification of the method to be
used for changing the article, at least 4 days and no more than 60 days before
it would take effect.

When an instrument enacts an article or changes an article's power, that
article's new power is set to the minimum of:

1. The power specified in that instrument;

2. The power of that instrument itself; and

3. The maximum power allowed by other articles.

This rule provides the only mechanism by which articles can be created,
modified, or destroyed, or by which an entity can become a article or cease to
be an article.

Proposals
---------

A proposal is a document specifying the following attributes:

1. A title;

2. An adoption index; and

3. A body.

Any member can submit a proposal by announcement, which adds it to the proposal
pool. The author of a proposal is the person who submitted it.

A proposal cannot be changed after it has been submitted. The author of a
proposal in the proposal pool can withdraw it from the proposal pool at any
time by announcement.

Distribution
------------

Determining whether to adopt a proposal is a decision. For this decision, the
vote collector is the Chair, the adoption index is the adoption index of the
proposal, and the title, author, and body of the proposal are essential
parameters. Initiating such a decision is called distributing the proposal, and
removes the proposal from the proposal pool.

The Chair can distribute a proposal which is in the proposal pool at any time,
by announcement.

The Chair must assign each distributed proposal a unique ID number by
announcement, in a timely fashion, and should do so in the same message when
distributing the proposal.

Adopting Proposals
------------------

When a decision about whether to adopt a proposal is resolved, if the outcome
is ADOPTED, then the proposal in question is adopted. Unless other articles
prevent it from taking effect, its power is set to the minimum of four and its
adoption index, and then it takes effect.

Except as prohibited by other articles or by circumstances beyond the control
of this Charter, a proposal that takes effect can, and does, as part of its
effect, apply the changes it specifies.

If there is no decision to adopt a particular proposal that has an outcome of
ADOPTED, that proposal cannot take effect.
