Officers & Offices
==================

This article has a power of 2.

Officers & Offices
------------------

An office is an entity defined as such by this Charter. An office is
either vacant, or held by a member. A member who holds an office is an officer.

All offices are elected. A person cannot be made the holder of an office
without their explicit or reasonably implied consent.

The holder of an office can resign by announcement at any time, causing the
office to become vacant immediately. If at any time the holder of an office
ceases to be a member, the offices they hold become vacant.

The Chair
---------

The Chair is an office, responsible for overseeing business conducted by the
members of SOA.

The Chair's monthly report includes the following information each public forum:

1. Adequate information to allow persons to fully participate in each forum; and

2. The date on which it was designated as a public forum.

The Chair's monthly report also includes the following information about each
member:

1. Adequate contact information to ensure they can be identified and contacted;

3. The date they most recently became a member; and

4. Whether they are in good standing.

The Chair's monthly report also includes the following information about
disciplinary actions:

1. All persons who have a valid mark against them;

2. All persons who have been ejected, along with the date of their ejection; and

3. All persons who have been permanently ejected, along with the date of their
   ejection.

The Chair's monthly report also includes the following information about each
office:

1. The holder, if any, of that office;

3. The date of that office's last change in officeholder, if any; and

4. The current election status or the date the last election for that office
   was resolved, if any.

The Chair's monthly report also includes the following information about this
Charter:

1. A complete recital of the Charter; and

2. The date of the last change to the Charter.

The Chair's weekly duties include:

1. Distributing all proposals in the proposal pool.

Official Duties
---------------

For each office:

1. If any task is defined by this Charter as part of that office's weekly
   duties, then the officer for that office must perform it at least once per
   calendar week. If any information is defined by this Charter as part of
   that office's weekly report, then the officer for that office must publish
   all such information as part of their weekly duties.

2. If any task is defined by this Charter as part of that office's monthly
   duties, then the officer for that office must perform it at least once per
   calendar month. If any information is defined by this Charter as part
   of that office's monthly report, then the officer for that office must
   publish all such information as part of their monthly duties.

Any information defined by this Charter as part of an office's report,
without specifying which one, is part of that office's monthly report.

Election Procedure
------------------

A member can initiate an election for a specified office for which no election
is in progress, by announcement, if:

1. They hold the office;

2. The office is vacant;

3. A weekly or monthly duty for that office is more than seven days overdue;

4. If the last election for that office was resolved more than 90 days prior; or

5. If there has never been an election for that office.

When an election for an office is initiated, it enters a nomination period,
which lasts for seven days. During the nomination period, any member can become
a candidate in that election by announcement. A candidate ceases to be a
candidate if they withdraw their candidacy, or if they cease to be a member,
before the end of the election.

An election is contested if it has two or more candidates at the end of the
nomination period, and is uncontested otherwise. For a contested election,
nominations close at the end of the voting period. For an uncontested election,
nominations close at the end of the nomination period.

After the nomination period ends, the Chair must, in a timely fashion:

1. If the election is uncontested and has a single candidate, declare the
   candidate the winner;

2. If the election is uncontested and there are no candidates, declare the
   election ended with no winner; or

3. If the election is contested, initiate a decision to select the winner of
   the election.

   For this decision, the valid options are the candidates for that election,
   and the voting method is Instant Runoff. When this decision is resolved, its
   outcome, if a member, wins the election. If the outcome is not a member,
   then the election instead ends with no winner.

If there is no Chair, the member who initiated the election must do so, instead.

When a member wins an election for an office, they are installed as the
officeholder for that office, and the election ends.

Impeachment
-----------

Any member can demand impeachment by announcement. An impeachment demand
consists of:

1. The name of an officer;

2. The name of an office they hold;

3. A statement outlining the basis for the demand, such that the other members
   can determine whether they support the demand; and

4. A demand that the officer resign the office.

If the officer does not resign, and if two other members announce their support
for this demand within fourteen days, then any member can expel that officer
from that office they hold by announcement.

When an officer resigns within fourteen days of a demand for their impeachment, or is removed from their office by impeachment, an election is immediately initiated.

Members should not use this method to remove officers unless the officer has
abused the powers of their office or otherwise shown themselves to be unworthy
of the trust placed in them.
